[Music]
the story of the Titanic seems to have
been studied inside and out and we know
for a fact that the great ship was
destroyed by an iceberg but what if I
told you there was another culprit
altogether only one person knew about
this but kept it a secret for decades
and today at last we might just find out
the truth behind the sinking of the
unsinkable liner there are lots of facts
we know to be true about the Titanic it
was indeed the largest ocean liner of
its time and it sure was believed to be
unsinkable for a good reason
it's also a fact that the ship struck an
iceberg in the North Atlantic which
damaged its hull too much for it to stay
afloat what exactly led to this tragic
event however is still up for debate
most of the survivors were passengers
who could know all the details what they
knew was what they saw and that wasn't
much a massive boom and the following
commotion were the only things many of
the survivors could remember crew
members wouldn't talk a lot though after
an investigation of the event it was all
believed to be a terrible accident
more details popped up after long
decades it turned out that the cabinet
holding the binoculars was locked and
the key accidentally stayed on shore so
the lookout wasn't able to notice the
iceberg in time but the real reason why
the Titanic eventually hit it could be
entirely different it all started with
the statement made by lady Louise Paton
granddaughter of one of the surviving
crew members of the Titanic second
officer Charles Lightoller in 2010 she
boldly said that one of the most
prominent tragedies of the 20th century
happened because of a steering error and
that her grandfather had been the only
one who knew the truth later she would
publish a fictional book called good as
goal which doesn't have to do with the
Titanic directly but addresses the issue
from an unusual angle
the thing is lady Paton went public with
her statement because she knew the truth
wouldn't harm anybody today most Titanic
survivors had long since passed away
and White Star Line the company that
owned the liner had become non-existent
in 1934 having merged with Cunard
another British shipping company but
right after the shipwreck such
information could have destroyed the
lives of hundreds of people working for
White Star Line so what was this dark
secret that had been kept in one family
for almost a century the story goes as
follows one the night of the crash first
officer William Murdoch was on watch
somehow he managed to notice the iceberg
before the lookouts it was about two
miles away but the ship had reached its
cruising speed so Murdoch knew they'd
crashed right into the floating block of
ice in just a couple of minutes if the
course was not changed
he immediately issued in order to part a
starboard which in nautical terms means
turn hard right for some reason though
Robert Hitchens who was at the wheel
steered the liner in the opposite
direction making it go head-on at the
iceberg
then the lookouts finally noticed the
threat - and sounded the warning the
ship was still turning left making the
collision almost inevitable it was
performing this maneuver for a full
minute and it turned out to be fateful
when the steersman finally corrected his
mistake and started turning right the
Titanic only had another minute to get
out of harm's way but as we all know it
was not enough the ship smashed into the
iceberg at full speed leaving a nasty
gash in its right side which ultimately
led to its sinking but that wasn't the
end of it if the Titanic had just
stopped and stayed in place it could
have remained afloat long enough for the
help to come and all the passengers and
crew to be rescued RMS Carpathia was
just four hours away and it picked up
the distress signal almost immediately
but according to lady Paton Bruce is
chairman of white star lie who was also
on board the Titanic ordered the crew to
sail on at full speed he was afraid that
he'd lose an incredibly valuable asset
and his order was issued in a desperate
hope that the ship would somehow make it
however it worked the other way around
when the Titanic pushed on it scooped
water in abundance and the stress put on
the damaged hull became simply too much
the ship began falling apart and the
rest is history second officer Charles
Lightoller learned about the steering
error and the following order to press
on when the forest senior officers
gathered in William Murdoch's cabin he
didn't approve of the decision to sail
on but there was nothing he could do so
he dedicated himself to rescuing people
on board the sinking ship and saved
dozens or even hundreds of lives while
almost going down with a liner himself
he became the only senior officer to
survive the tragedy though later already
on shore his may talked with Lightoller
again an investigation and inquiry was
inevitable
so Ismay put the former second officer
before a difficult choice he could
either tell the Enquirer's the whole
story clearing his conscience or he
could cover up the steering mistake and
ismay's decision to sail on lying to the
whole world but saving hundreds of
people their jobs
you see if the truth had been uncovered
it would have meant annulment of White
Star Line's insurance making the company
bankrupt and all its employees jobless
it was a hard moral decision indeed but
Lightoller agreed to tell a cover-up
legend the only person he ever told the
real story was his wife Sylvia
grandmother of lady Louise Patton and
that was how she came to know the
darkest secret of the Titanic's crash I
know what you've been thinking for a
while now how could the steersman
misinterpret such a simple command and
turn left instead of right well it all
boils down to the fact that the
beginning of the 20th century was a time
of transition from sail ships
steam-powered ones to turn a steamboat
you needed to turn its rudder in the
direction you wanted it to go much like
turning the wheel of a car with sail
ships though it was more complicated
than that and the command to hard
a-starboard would mean turning the wheel
in the opposite direction hitchens the
steersman was an experienced sailor but
in the moment of panic he probably
forgot that the Titanic was a steamship
and turned hard left unintentionally
anyway this is the story that lady
Louise Patton told in her book and it
was a shocking revelation for many but
like I said it was already perfectly
safe then to make it public nobody of
those who could have been negatively
affected by the uncovered truth was
alive at the same time however nobody
was alive to support Lady Patton's
version of the events this doesn't worry
her too much though she said that anyone
who knows anything about the history of
the Titanic would realize that such a
ship could not have been sunk so simply
and yet so completely by an iceberg it
must have been something much more
serious and the story about a steering
blunder with the following reckless
orders by Bruce Ismay
sounds perfectly plausible she is also
not in the least ashamed of what her
grandfather had done after the tragedy
and no wonder Lightoller was caught
between two difficult moral choices and
he chose what he believed to be a small
evil for the greater good later he
became a real hero and his family had
all the rights to be proud of him like
toler's wife Sylvia stayed loyal to her
husband and had never told the truth
about what happened to the Titanic to
anyone but her daughter and then
granddaughter it was something of a
family secret going down from generation
to generation and now it's finally
revealed to the whole world there's no
way to prove or debunk this story today
but the Titanic is covered with layers
upon layers of mystery so who knows
maybe there are other details we don't
know yet about this legendary ship
and what about you do you believe lady
Louise Patton's version of the events or
do you perhaps have other theories of
what might have happened to the Titanic
share your thoughts down in the comments
hey if you learned something new today
then give this video a like and share it
with a friend but hey don't go looking
for sunken ships just yet we have over
two thousand cool videos for you to
check out just click on this left or
right video and enjoy remember stay on
the bright side of life